---
layout: post
title:  Book Retrospective - The Science of Motorsport
date:   2019-10-19 13:15:00 -0400
categories: jekyll update
---

This year's racing season was marked by a shift in focus from the vehicle to
the racing driver. Vehicle development was not sufficient to achieve the
desired performance objectives. We had to look elsewhere for performance
improvements and found opportunities in driver development.

Vehicle engineering benefits from of a history of research. Notable discoveries
in vehicle dynamics were studied as early as the 1930s with pioneers like
Maurice Olley. In contrast, the case to study racing driving as a sport was
proposed in 2013 by Potkanowicz and Mondel. Searching on Google Scholar for
'vehicle dynamics' shows 195,000 results; the term 'driver science' yields 228
results.

To study the driver in equal weight and importance to studying the vehicle
would mean understanding the current state-of-the-art. This is when we relied
on David Ferguson's book, "The Science of Motorsport".

# Motivation
As a enthusiast at the amateur levels of motorsport, I wanted to know the
following:
* Why do professional racing drivers have superior vehicle maneuvering abilities?
* What are the constitutive skills and traits that make a good racing driver?
* How can I help drivers achieve their performance objectives?

These questions are motivated by the quantity of anecdotal findings.  The
quality of these findings varies and corroboration with literature is necessary
to verify their validity. While seat time is important, it is not sufficient;
further development is required to achieve the success.

The increased visibility of driver development programs at the professional
level contributes to this line of questioning. Professional driver development
programs like the McLaren Human Performance Program are quite secretive, though
their existence is suggestive their value.

# The Book
David P. Ferguson's "The Science of Motorsport" is one of the few books that
addresses the importance of human performance using evidence-based research to
support their findings. Its editor describes it as an 'accessible and
up-to-date resource'. I will agree with the latter, with the book representing
a snapshot in what is known about human performance in motorsport.

The book is a 165 page paperback covering a wide range of topics from
physiological demands, nutritional requirements, psychological considerations to
track safety. Each chapter is written by a subject expert contributor and is
supported by numerous external citations.

Each chapter is sufficiently structured to be read independently. However, it
is clear they ordered to thematically develop from discussing the acute
stressors placed on the driver to the importance of teamwork on overall
success. Human performance is not limited to just the racing driver, but to pit
crews and safety teams working along side the racing driver.

"The Science of Motorsport" is not without caveats; there is no _recipe_ for
improving your driving skill and it lacks actionable tools described in many
self-help driving resources. The reader is left to themselves to develop a
program that best suites their performance objectives with the field being too
young to have concrete recommendations. However, this is an accurate reflection
of the state-of-the art with many questions left for professionals, academics
and amateurs alike.

# What We Learned
Despite the wealth of literature available in sports science and sports
psychology, it is apparent that its application to motorsports represents a new
opportunity for improving vehicle performance and track safety.

## Driver-Athlete
Although anyone with a valid drivers license can drive a vehicle, the racing
driver is an athlete who is subjected to wide variety of physical stressors. By
operating a racing vehicle, the racing driver is subjected to high
temperatures, carbon monoxide exposure, vehicle vibrations, and inertial
forces.

This puts the racing driver under extreme physiological stress. In studies
involving endurance racing drivers, it is shown that heart rate values reach
\>80% of age-estimated maximal heart rates. Physical strength is required to
operate the vehicle controls under continuous g-loading cycles. Additionally,
the driver must operate in these conditions for the duration of their stint,
sometimes lasting up to 2 hours.

## Measuring Driver Demand
The pervasive use of data acquisition systems demonstrates its importance in
performance engineering. With the rise of CAN and OBD-II enabled systems, the
data acquisition system has become an indispensable tool for professionals and
amateurs alike.

Interestingly, the same pervasiveness has not yet extended to the racing
driver, both on and off the race track. Both subjective and objective
measurements can provide insight into human performance. Off the race track,
conventional metrics can be used to assess physical fitness. These metrics
include VO2MAX, lactate threshold, strength tests results and physiological
measures.

## Mental Skills


# Future Research
## Driver Specific Development

## Perceptual Training

## Optimal Control


## References
http://www.millikenresearch.com/MauriceOlleybyWFMilliken.pdf

1. Potkanowicz, Edward S., and Ronald W. Mendel. “The Case for Driver Science in Motorsport: A Review and Recommendations.” Sports Medicine 43, no. 7 (July 2013): 565–74. https://doi.org/10.1007/s40279-013-0040-2.

